Hi. In this video we're going to take a quick look at functions.
So functions. Well there's lots of functions that are built in to Python.
Some are available just by default as soon as you start running python. You have a lot of things that
are available.
For example, if we take s to be some kind of list then we have the len() function which just returns the
number of elements in s.
So that's built in.
Sometimes you have other built in functions that Python provides, that you have to import from some module.
So for example we might have from math import square root.
So now we have this square root function available to us.
So we can just call it this way.
Right.
So we had squareroot of 4 is 2.
You can also just import the entire module, in which case you'll have access to everything that's inside
that module, for example:
math dot pi which is a constant that's available in there, or all the functions as well.
So we can take maybe the exponent.
So e to the power of one, so that will give us the value of e.
So those are things that are built in.
But we can also define our own functions.
Now functions are just objects that basically contain some stuff including our code when we write a
function, and then we assign that to a name, to a variable, and that's what the def statement does. The
def statement, essentially, you specify the name of the function that you want so maybe func_1.
Then we have parentheses that we use to put in parameters.
In this case I'm not going to define any parameters but we still need the parentheses there.
And we might say print, ahm
"running func_1", ok.
So here we have our function.
Now we can call this function, we can invoke the function, and at that time,
then Python will go ahead and run
what's defined for that function.
Now you have to be careful.
You cannot just call a function like this.
If you do that what you're really getting is the function itself.
Right.
The function exists as an object, and it's called func underscore one. To call the function, to run the
function or to invoke the function,
you have to say func underscore one with the parentheses. In this case we have no parameters so no arguments.
And there we go.
We see that it ran.
Running func_1.
And we can define variables, parameters
basically, that we're going to pass into the function; and we just give them a name and this is going
to be a name that's going to be local to the function and maybe we're going to return a times b.
Now you'll notice that there are no types.
We'll get to that later.
But you know there are there are no static types.
You don't define the type in Python of what you have in your function.
Now if you want, you can actually put in something called an annotation, you know, something like mayve int, saying int.
And so basically you're saying hey I'm, you know, I'm going to be passing two integers, that's what I expect
in this function.
But this is just a documentation thing; it's got nothing to do with the Python interpreter actually looking
at this.
And if you pass in because we do this we can certainly pass in two comma three to pass in some integers.
But we can also Pass in let's say a string and an integer.
So let's do that, which returns the string times b which just repeats the string a certain number of
times.
We can also call maybe a list,
and we'll repeat it three times.
And here we go we have the elements repeated three times in that list.
So this really didn't stop us from you know calling either of these functions with these parameters
here.
So it's just a documentation thing.
Many IDEs will use that, so that as you're typing your code and as you're calling func_2
it will tell you "hey you know you need a parameter of type int, you need a parameter of type int", you know
or whatever the case may be.
You know, other libraries xor libraries can use that to understand what it's supposed to do what it's
supposed to pass in.
But really that's not built into Python.
Python is very polymorphic, and here we see an example of that, right.
We can pass to integers and the star operator will work; and you can pass in a string and an integer
that will work as well.
You can pass in a list and an integer that will work as well.
Now it doesn't work in all cases.
Right.
Sometimes things don't work.
So if we pass in two strings that's not going to work, because why? It's not defined! We don't have multiplication
defined for two, for two strings.
So this is an example of polymorphism, we'll come back to polymorphism in a lot more detail later in
the course, when we start looking at object oriented programming.
So anyway, back to functions. So we can create our own functions and to call and invoke the function.
We just have to p.. to put in you know the square the round brackets.
And if we have any parameters we put our arguments in there, as we call the function.
So pretty straightforward.
The next thing is that functions are just like a variable in the sense that it's just a name. This func_2
here is just a name.
And as we saw earlier if we don't call func_2, if we just do this -
then it tells us that this is a function. This is a function that exists.
And it was assigned to the name and that's what def does.
def basically, as soon as Python encounters this statement over here, this def statement, it looks at this
and say OK you want to create a function which is going to be named func_2.
It's going to have these parameters.
And this is the code that's inside
func_2. But it doesn't execute the code inside func_2 at this point. It doesn't even really look at
it.
It kind of stores it and puts it away into an object.
The only thing it does is it creates the function, and the meta data around the function to include things
like the parameter list and so on.
And also the code block that's associated with the function. But it's not the function itself.
In fact what we can do therefore is, we can call functions inside this that haven't been defined yet.
So if you have a piece of code like this.
def func_1 that's redefined func_1,
and here I'm going to return the result of calling func_2.
Now you'll notice that func_2 hasn't been defined yet.
So here I'm going to now define func_2.
And actually we really have func_1 and func_2.
And so you might think that this is working because we have that.
So let me go ahead and call it func_3 and we'll call func_4 we've never seen those functions
before, that don't exist, they're not built in.
So let's see if this works and then here we'll return:
"Running func_4" OK.
So at this point I can just run this code and these functions have been defined.
They're fine.
They exist, they're there.
But you'll notice we didn't get an error because even though we called func_4 here, it didn't exist.
It wasn't even defined yet, but that's ok.
Python doesn't care about that because it's just creating the function right now.
So this will work.
And if we call func_3 now, at this point, now it's going to look at the code inside func_3 and execute it.
And so at that point it's going to require some form to exist.
And of course it works just fine.
If we had done this instead:
def func_ now I'll use 5.
def func_5 now will return func_6.
If now I call func_5 from here and then define func_6 which will print "running function 6", ok, if we
do that -
Now we get an error. Because func 5 is being evaluated right here, is being invoked, being executed, which
means that it needs to execute this line of code.
But of course func_6 isn't defined.
So now it has a problem.
So as you can see it's OK in most modules, that's what happens.
You define you put your functions at the top and then if you have code that actually runs inside the
module then you put it after all your definitions, but the order in which you put in your definitions
of your functions in your module,
as long as they're not being invoked,
doesn't matter.
You can, you know, invoke a function before, where you can write a statement that is going to invoke a
function, before you've actually defined the function itself in the module.
That's fine.
That will work just fine.
So the next thing I want to look at is another way of defining a function.
We saw how to define a function using def, but we also have something called a lambda.
And we'll take a look at lambdas in a lot more detail later.
But for now let's just see how that works.
Lambda is basically something that allows you to create the function but it doesn't use this syntax
here.
It doesn't.
You don't have to define a name for the function at that point.
You don't even have to give the function a name.
Basically it's just an expression that's going to create a function for you and return the function
since the function is just, you know, a type like an integer or like a float.
It's no different.
It's still just a regular object.
In fact, we can take a look at the type of func_6 and we'll see that.
I don't have func_6, oh I never defined func_6, that was the whole idea.
So let's go ahead and look at func_5.
OK it's a function.
So it's just another object in memory.
In fact we can even assign that function to another variable.
We can't say maybe my_func equals
Func_5.
Well let's use func_4.
I want something that actually works ok, so for my_func equals funk_4. Now
if I call func_4, I get "Running func_4", but I can also call my_func because it's the same thing.
And so it also says "Running func_4".
So as you can see, we can just assign a function to a variable name.
That's what def does. lambda does the same thing then there.
But it doesn't assign it a name.
You don't have to give it a name so we'd write something like this lambda let's say and it takes a parameter
x and it's going to return x square, ok.
And so what does this do?
Well, as you can see it returned a function.
So we're going to have to give it a name if we want to be able to use it in this context.
In other contexts you may not do that you may just pass that to as the argument to some other function
that needs a function to evaluate.
And we'll get into that in detail and see how all that works that might be confusing.
For now I just want to point out that I can say you know fn1 is equal to lambda x, and I will return
x squared.
So now we've given it a name, we have given this thing here, this function, a name called fn1, and now
we can call fn1 and we can pass it a parameter of 2 and we get 4 back.
So those are all lambdas.
We'll take a look at lambdas and a lot more detail later on in this course.
But what I want to point out is that it's just a function, right.
Just like def is, and functions are just objects that we can assign to variables and then invoke them
by using this parentheses over here.
So that's how we invoke the functions.
But fn1 itself, it's just that lambda function.
All right, so it's no different than a regular function.
The thing is with lambdas you can't have big code blocks.
It can has to fit on one line. Of course you can do line continuations that's OK but it's not meant to
replace the def.
It's just meant to be for kind of inline anonymous functions that you can pass to another function because
you can pass functions to functions, and we'll see that later on in the course as well.
So that's functions in a nutshell.
Just the basics, and we'll dig much deeper into them throughout this course.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.